---
title: "Western Elitism"
date: 2025-2-13
coursename: Sociology 460
courselink: https://www.athabascau.ca/syllabi/soci/soci460.html
category: Final Reflection 
---


Prior to taking this course, I realized I never paid attention to technology and science or their effects on my daily life. Still, I have to emphasize that I never truly realized the damaging effects of technology, or perhaps I never truly wanted to. Technology and its power to connect and innovate are magical yet poisonous, and I am surprised that I never looked at it that way prior to this class but, this is what learning is all about. I, just like billions of the other people on the planet, rely on my smartphone, my laptop and all the other beautiful things that technological advances have provided me with but, I have to admit that the use of these devices has rendered me blind and easy to take advantage of, something I believe, even after this course will never change. Technology and its power to control us using those beautiful glass screens is something that frightens me. Still, the fear, I believe, will quickly dissipate and disappear as brand new technology arrives and blinds me once more. I have learned quite a few things that I believe will stay with me in light of all this, acting as reminders every once a while because honesty still remains the best policy. 

First, I probably will never be able to live without technology, and that is an unfortunate yet fortunate fact. Technology is everywhere and always within reach. To me, technology means endless opportunities for success or failure when technology is actively working against me. As a woman in the 21st century, this course has taught me that technology may not always be there for me. From this course, I have learned that the advancement of technology is largely in the control of men; while this is obvious, I never realized that the situation remains the same today. As technology advances and the age of information technology reigns supreme, women will continue to be negatively impacted. Discovering this unfortunate truth is sad but, as I learned that technological advancements are particularly threatening to female employment, I became aware that I have to be critical of how I use technology to adapt to changing times. Additionally, I learned that I also have to be vigilant of how others use technology as well. As I find myself in a generation where female voices are getting louder and louder, technology is also giving voices to people who want to take us back in time, further marginalizing women in today’s society. This course has taught me that education is critical when utilizing technology as some use the information-sharing aspects to manipulate and control. I must be vigilant about the content I consume because what I read and look at up on the internet may form my opinions or views, and I should not let myself be manipulated. The topic of Cambridge Analytica made me realize how little we think for ourselves and how we as humans depend on others to make up our minds for us as we blindly follow. Looking at recent events in politics, it seems that people might believe anything with enough pushing in a particular direction. 

Furthermore, technology, to me, prior to taking this course, was something that made everyone’s life a little bit easier. I thought that technology, despite some of its negative aspects, was something that improved our lives if used in moderation. But, I realized that technology is something that may bring people farther apart. As I’ve learned in this class, information has become a commodity, and this fact is one that I believe creates divides in society. As information has become a commodity, I’ve learned that precious items are usually held or controlled by someone, and the same goes for information received through technology. I’ve learned that information is controlled by those who have power, and these individuals are often wealthy. There is a race to be the best and the richest, and those who are the most disadvantaged in the world pay the price. I knew about sweatshops and exploitation that occurs within those factory walls, but it took a second glance and an assignment to understand that someone was forced to work in an unsafe environment for me to hold my phone or use my laptop. Despite its benefits, technology has become something that the powerful use to exploit people based on specific characteristics we are either born with or one’s difficult circumstances. Discrimination is a word that I am familiar with when the direct definition is in question but, I am shocked that I overlooked the fact that technology is also playing a part. For a group of men on one side of the world to feel powerful, it takes thousands of people on the other side of the world to suffer, and that is shameful. 

Besides this, it is a sad reality that technology, an element in our lives that seems to connect everyone across the world, is also separating us in ways that we cannot see. It makes sense that lower-income communities are less able to have technology less readily available but, because I see smartphones and other pieces of technology everywhere, I found it easy to forget that technology is a privilege and not a right. And for that, I honestly do feel embarrassed. I’ve realized that the powerful people who control technology and its information have created this huge gap between those who can use it and those who cannot; the digital divide. Despite the pervasiveness of technology, there are many people who don’t have the tools or the ability to use technology due to their financial situation or the social constructs of categorical inequalities. Technology and its information can provide people with a wealth of knowledge that permits them to build better lives. Yet, there are millions of people around the world who cannot have access to various types of technology. I find this incredibly unjust, but then again, it just seems expected that this race for information has winners and losers. 

However, what I found the most shocking was that the digital divide also occurs close to home. It’s odd yet evident that not much is being as the communities found within the gap of the digital divide are those who are already neglected in society. But, I believe that if governing powers continue to ignore these communities, they are the real losers. I find it interesting that countries lack the emotions to take care of their own but would instead look elsewhere for opportunity. I know that companies look to save money and enjoy the lax laws of certain countries but, throughout this course, I’ve noticed the theme of escape as countries, their governments and the wealthy refuse to face the music. Powerful and wealthy people in our societies have caused so many problems, and it’s normal for them never to have to clean their mess. I think the worst part is that we have been conditioned, or perhaps we have normalized, that it’s okay for the rich to use people. From the beginning of technology in the Western world to today’s technological revolution, I’ve learned that there will always be a fight between two types of people; the winners and losers or the rich and poor. Throughout this course, I felt that one question was always being asked, will things ever change? I believe that the problems that plague society will get better to a degree but, history always repeats itself. I think the connection between religion and science best describes the slight positive changes experienced through history because, as humans, we are always searching for paradise or a happy ending. We aim to be better and want more for ourselves, reaching a type of power that is supreme and God-like. But, in this venture to be perfect or, in the case of technology, productive, it seems that morals are is forgotten. It looks like it doesn’t matter who is in the way of perfection or productivity; all roadblocks must be dealt with swiftly. There are few worthy of this perfection, so only the chosen few can reap the benefits.

This course has opened my eyes to the elitism of Western society, and this way of thinking furthers the divide in society and acts as the foundation of most problems in the world. By using technology, I’ve learned that I am giving myself away to the powerful people who seem to be behind the scenes of technological advances. Every time I visit a website or like an image on social media, I am giving away information about myself for these powerful people to utilize against me. But, it seems that as long as they release some new app or phone, I will be attracted to that novelty long enough to distract me from their true intentions. From this realization, I’ve understood that I have to be aware that technology is a form of control that I must control myself but continuously asking questions and learning about what is playing behind the screen; in other words, it’s time to read the terms and conditions of agreement. 
